.TH LOCKDEV 3  "26 Dec 1997" "Linux Manpage" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
lockdev, liblockdev, is_dev_locked, lock_dev, relock_dev, unlock_dev \- manage device lockfiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <lockdev.h>
.sp
.BI "pid_t is_dev_lock( const char * " devname ");"
.br
.BI "pid_t lock_dev( const char * " devname ");"
.br
.BI "pid_t relock_dev( const char * " devname ", const pid_t " pid ");"
.br
.BI "pid_t unlock_dev( const char * " devname ", const pid_t " pid ");"
.sp
.BI "cc [ "flag " ... ] "file " ... -llockdev [ "library " ] "
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B lockdev
functions act on device locks normally located in 
.B /var/lock .
The lock is acquired creating a pair of files hardlinked between them
and named after the device name (as mandated by FSSTND) and the device's
major and minor numbers (as in SVr4 locks). This permits to circumvent a
problem using only the FSSTND lock method when the same device exists
under different names (for convenience or when a device must be
accessable by more than one group of users).
.br
The lock file names are typically in the form
.B LCK..ttyS1
and 
.B LCK.004.065 ,
but is provided a way to easily modify them to use the library on
different architectures. The content of those files is the pid of the
process who owns the lock.
.sp
The 
.B is_dev_lock()
function simply checks if the device is in some way locked and if the
owner of the lock is still active (otherways it removes the lock).
It recognise a valid lock even if only one of the two lock files exists
(and is owned by an existing process), thus permitting a safe use of
this library toghether with programs using only FSSTND or SVr4 lock
style.
.sp
The 
.B lock_dev() 
function first checks if the device is already locked and then tryes to
acquire the lock building the two lock files. First it creates the file
which name contains the major and minor numbers (in SVr4 style), then it
creates the file with the device name in its name. This order reduces
the clashes with other processes trying to lock the same device (even
with a different name) and using this library. It has no problem with
processes that uses only the FSSTND algorithm.
.sp
The 
.B relock_dev() 
function changes the owner of an existing lock; if the pid of the old
owner is provided, then it checks if the lock was correctly assigned
(otherways there is the possibility of a process acquiring a lock which
was owned by another unrelated process). If the device was not locked,
locks it.
.sp
The 
.B unlock_dev() 
function removes the existing locks on the device. If the pid of the
owner of the lock is provided, then it check if the locks are assigned
to that process, avoiding to remove locks assigned to other existing
processes.

.SH RETURN VALUES
All the functions in 
.B lockdev
library return 
.B ZERO 
on successfull completion of the function (is_dev_lock returns zero if
there is no lock on the device), otherways, if the device is currently
locked by an existing process, they return the pid of the process owner
of the lock. They return a negative number when some kind of error
happens. Actually they all return only (-1).

.SH DEBUGGING
The 
.B API
has symbols used only for debugging purposis
.sp
.BI "int liblockdev_debug"
.br
.BI "void liblockdev_incr_debug( void );"
.br
.BI "void liblockdev_reset_debug( void );"
.sp
which can be used when the liblockdev library is compiled with 
.B -DDEBUG
flag as when using 
.B make install-dbg ,
which compiles a debug shared library and installs it under
/usr/local/lib/debug (or /usr/lib/debug).
.br
The value of the global integer is set to 1 by the DEBUG define,
and can be set to a different value passing a flag like 
.B -DDEBUG=3 
during compilation of the library, or setting the environment variable
.B LIBLOCKDEV_DEBUG
to the wanted value before executing your program.
.br
During execution of your program, the flag's value can be changed from
your program or from another teminal, respectively using the function
.B liblockdev_incr_debug() ,
or sending SIGUSR1 to the running process,
to increment the value of the integer by one, or using the function
.B liblockdev_reset_debug() ,
or sending SIGUSR2 to the running process,
to set to zero the value of the global integer.
.br
Direct manipulation of the global integer is strongly deprecated,
because the data structure of the symbol (actually an integer) could be
changed later in some way, or even become a macro.
.sp
The library prints on stdout some informations like error conditions
(level of 1), normal termination conditions (2) or function calling (3).
.sp
To use the debug shared library, simply define in your environment the
variable LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/lib/debug (or /usr/local/lib/debug if
built using make install-dbg) and call gdb or directly your program
without any need to recompile it. As you can check with ldd, your
program will load the debug library instead of the normal one.
.br
Beware that if your program is setuid or setgid, you must become root to
let this work, because ld.so ignores the LD_LIBRARY_PATH variable for
security reasons.
.sp
On
.B Debian GNU/Linux
systems exists a debug binary package named
.B liblockdev0g-dbg 
which installs a shared library built with all
debugging options (and the -DDEBUG flag) into /usr/lib/debug .

.SH FILES
/var/lock/LCK..<device>
.br
/var/lock/LCK.<major>.<minor>
.br
/usr/lib/liblockdev.so.0
.br
/usr/lib/debug/liblockdev.so.0

.SH HISTORY
(c) 1997 by Fabrizio Polacco <fpolacco@debian.org>.
.br
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published
by the Free Software Foundation; version 2 dated June, 1991.
